feat: revise spec to align with OpenAPI definitions; align text for consistency, demote non-specification foreign text to references rather than normative statements (#4)
nicoprow/catenax-ev.github.io: docs/standards/CX-0135-CompanyCertificateManagement/CX-0135-CompanyCertificateManagement.md

Reviewer: maybe to differentiate and make the diagram more readable we could:
- CREATED --> WITHDRAWN: provider withdraws the **created** certificate
- MODIFIED --> WITHDRAWN: provider withdraws the **modified** certificate

NOT** in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [RFC2119](#rfc2119) [RFC8174](#rfc8174) when, and
only when they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

- A participant **MAY** support any of the APIs (based on their need; more explicitly, a Consumer role without support
  of the Certificate Consumer API is valid):
    - Certificate Consumer API (see [Section 3.2](#32-certificate-consumer-api))
    - Certificate Provider API (see [Section 3.3](#33-certificate-provider-api))
- Business Application Provides **MUST** support both, the Certificate Provider API and the Certificate Consumer API.
- Based on the previous requirements, the participant **MUST** be compliant with all normative requirements defined in

>   the respective sections of this standard. Especially the state machines, APIs and data model. Even a Consumer without

Reviewer 2: A Consumer in the sense of acting in the role of Data Provider/Consumer does not have to proof anything, as certification is not relevant for this role. The business application it is using has to be certified, but that's it.

A `Certificate Exchange` may be opened by the Certificate Consumer or Certificate Provider:

> - **Consumer-Initiated:** the Certificate Consumer opens the exchange by requesting a certificate. The

Reviewer 2: Please do not use an own role definition in the standard, it should be defined, how activities of this standard map to existing roles like the DSP motivated Consumer and Provider or the Legal Framework motivated Data Consumer and Data Provider.

> - **Consumer-Initiated:** the Certificate Consumer opens the exchange by requesting a certificate. The Certificate

Reviewer 2: What is a certificate exchange, it is defined above context free and what does initiating mean. Especially the relationship to contracts and transfer types has to be clear and actually should be defined in the section above.

Author: A certificate exchange is defined in Section 2.1:

>A `Certificate Exchange` represents one end-to-end interaction between a Certificate Provider and a Certificate Consumer
involving the delivery of a single certificate from the time the interaction is started until it reaches a terminal
outcome.

There is also a comprehensive state machine defined in the specification. A Certificate Exchange is a concept specific to CCM; it is orthogonal to the control plane concepts of a DSP `Contract`or `Data Transfer Type`.

| `DECLINED`                | Consumer-Initiated | Fulfillment | Provider | Yes      | The Provider declined the request (a business decision; e.g. the certificate type is not offered).               |
| `FAILED`                  | Consumer-Initiated | Fulfillment | Provider | Yes      | The Provider could not produce a valid certificate (a business error; e.g. the certificate is invalid).          |
| `RETRIEVED`               | -                  | Acceptance  | Consumer | No       | The Consumer fetched the certificate and is processing it. *(Optional — see the note below.)*                    |
| `ACCEPTED`                | -                  | Acceptance  | Consumer | Yes      | The Consumer accepted the certificate.                                                                           |
| `REJECTED`                | -                  | Acceptance  | Consumer | Yes      | The Consumer did not accept the certificate content (a business decision).                                       |

> | `ERRORED`                 | -                  | Acceptance  | Consumer | Yes      | The Consumer found the certificate to be in error (a business error; e.g. the certificate is invalid).           |

Reviewer 3: I suggest simplifying the model by reconsidering ERRORED and RETRIEVED.

The distinction between REJECTED and ERRORED is not clearly defined and may lead to inconsistent interpretations. In practice, it is often unclear whether an issue should be classified as a business decision or a data quality error.

Removing ERRORED (and consolidating into REJECTED)

Author: The `REJECTED` state is intended for cases where the certificate is valid but not accepted, e.g., it does not meet all required conditions or cover the required sites. This is technically not an error condition.`ERRORED` would be used to indicate cases like "the certificate contents are corrupted".

If people feel this distinction is not needed from a business perspective, we could remove `REJECTED` or `ERRORED`. However, we should keep in mind that if we remove `REJECTED` there is no way to indicate a certificate has been rejected - the exchange will just be `ERRORED`.

> *This section is non-normative*

Of the publication events, only `CREATED` MAY open a new `Certificate Exchange` to deliver the certificate — whether
pushed by the Provider or discovered and requested by the Consumer. `MODIFIED` and `WITHDRAWN` do not open an exchange: a
modification revises the certificate in place under the same `certificateId` without initiating a new delivery, and a
withdrawal ends the certificate's availability. Consistent with
[Section 2.1.5](#215-relationship-to-the-certificate-lifecycle), a lifecycle transition never alters an existing
`Certificate Exchange.` These transitions are communicated to Certificate Consumers as certificate lifecycle events (see
[Section 3.2.1](#321-certificate-lifecycle-events)).

## 3 APPLICATION PROGRAMMING INTERFACES

> *This section is normative*

The API specification is separated in two parts, one for the Certificate Provider and one for the Certificate Consumer.
A network participant is not limited to either of those roles; for example, a participant could be a Certificate
Consumer in one interaction and a Certificate Provider in another.

> Which APIs a participant exposes depends on its capabilities:

Reviewer 2: Participant is a defined role, should be capital letters

| To…                                                             | Certificate Provider API ([Section 3.3](#33-certificate-provider-api)) | Certificate Consumer API ([Section 3.2](#32-certificate-consumer-api))      |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| offer certificates to other participants                        | **MUST** expose                                                        | —                                                                           |
| receive lifecycle notifications and provide acceptance feedback | —                                                                      | **MUST** expose (register `…ConsumerApi` or `…ConsumerEmbeddedDocumentApi`) |

> | act as a Business Application Provider                          | **MUST** expose                                                        | **MUST** expose                                                             |

Reviewer 2: This table is hard to understand, as it mixes up things. What does expose mean?

Issue is, that if a Business Application Provider has to offer both apis (and that is what you mean with expose here) every Data Provider/Consumer exposes these APIs as well, as they are exposed by the operator of the service.

If a Data Provider/Consumer can only expose (in the sense of make accessible) certain APIs, the Business Application Provider does not have to expose anything, because the responsibility for exposing an API lies in the Data Provider/Consumer role, the Business Application Provider does only provide services for a Data Provider/Consumer, so he is not offering anything.

A BAP would have to implement both APIs to provide a certifiable business application, but that would be something different from exposing the API.

Requesting and retrieving certificates from a Provider requires no exposed API — a Certificate Consumer calls the
Certificate Provider API directly.

This section introduces the certificate management notification API which is based on the following OpenAPI
specifications which **MUST** be adhered to:

- [Certificate Consumer API](assets/certificate-consumer-api.yaml)
- [Certificate Provider API](assets/certificate-provider-api.yaml)

The OpenAPI specification **MUST** be used as the baseline, the following subsections add additional normative

> requirements and clarifications. Each supported API **MUST** be discoverable and made accessible via
> a [DSP Catalog](#dsp-catalog).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
requirements and clarifications. Each supported API **MUST** be discoverable and made accessible as defined in [CX-0018](normative reference follows here). 
```
Use Case standards do not reference EDWG standards directly, but make use of the Catena-X instantiation in CX-0018!

A dataspace participant that chooses to implement an API **MUST**

> - offer an asset to expose the API for Certificate Provider in the DSP catalog.

Reviewer 2: I think the asset metaphore is not the right one. CX-0018 only offers Dataset as concept, so imho a right normative reference would be MUST offer a Dataset as defined in CX-0018 to expose the API...

| cx-taxo:CCMAPI | cx-taxo:CompanyCertificateManagementConsumerApi                 | 3.0         | Offers *Certificate Consumer API* according to [Section 3.2](#32-certificate-consumer-api) for receiving notifications on certificate lifecycle events and providing feedback on the status of provided certificates.                                                                                  |
| cx-taxo:CCMAPI | cx-taxo:CompanyCertificateManagementConsumerEmbeddedDocumentApi | 3.0         | Variant of the *Certificate Consumer API* that additionally receives certificate documents embedded inline in `CREATED`/`MODIFIED` lifecycle notifications (see [Section 3.2.1](#321-certificate-lifecycle-events)). A Certificate Consumer registers either this subject or `…ConsumerApi`, not both. |
| cx-taxo:CCMAPI | cx-taxo:CompanyCertificateManagementProviderApi                 | 3.0         | Offers *Certificate Provider API* according to [Section 3.3](#33-certificate-provider-api) for requesting certificates, retrieving certificates, providing feedback on the status of certificate requests, and searching for certificates.                                                             |

> There **MUST** only be one unique asset per API (subject and version) for a participant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There **MUST** only be one unique asset per API (subject and version) for a Participant.
```
Btw, do you mean Participant (i.e., any entity that has a role in Catena-X) or do you mean Data Provider/Consumer (i.e., any entity that actively provides or consumes data in Catena-X)?

> There **MUST** only be one unique asset per API (subject and version) for a participant.

Reviewer 4: Is `asset` the most precise wording here? Shouldn't it be dataset or a data offer? Or one exposed asset?

Author: it should be `Dataset`. We can do a final pass on the spec after to convert these terms.

- ```{ "dct:subject": { "@id": "cx-taxo:CompanyCertificateManagementProviderApi" }, "cx-common:version": "3.0" }```,
- ```{ "dct:subject": { "@id": "cx-taxo:CompanyCertificateManagementProviderApi" }, "cx-common:version": "4.0" }```

since they either differ in the value of the version or the subject. But it would not be possible to have two of the
same subject and the same version.

*Example that is not allowed:*

- ```{"dct:subject": { "@id": "cx-taxo:CompanyCertificateManagementConsumerApi" }, "cx-common:version": "3.0" }```,
- ```{"dct:subject": { "@id": "cx-taxo:CompanyCertificateManagementConsumerApi" }, "cx-common:version": "3.0" }```

The two assets above are not allowed, because they share both the same subject and the same version.
___

### 3.1 Security and Authorization

> *This section is normative*

**Transport.** All endpoints defined in this standard **MUST** be exposed over HTTPS (HTTP over TLS 1.2 or higher).

**Authorization.** Access to every CCM API and to certificate data is mediated by the Dataspace Protocol: a caller
**MUST** have negotiated a contract for the relevant asset and **MUST** present the resulting access token (token

> handling as defined in [CX-0000](#cx-0000)). Use of the data is bound by the usage policy in

Reviewer 2: This is specified in CX-0018, that might not be the case completely today, but the application of EDWG standards and how Authentication and Authorization is handled is in the context of the Dataspace Connectivity expert group and cannot be redefined outside of that scope.

If there are requirements, please state them to the expert group, but it is not acceptable to have them regulated in this standard or in a new one that comes from outside of that expert group.

Author: The intent here is not to define authorization. Rather, it is to bind the CCM API to the authz/n mechanisms defined by DSP and CX-0018.

My proposal would be to add a reference to CX-0018 and re-word this as follows, removing `asset` which is EDC specific and replacing it with the correct DSP term:

>**Authorization.** Access to every CCM API and to certificate data is mediated by the Dataspace Protocol: a caller
**MUST** have negotiated a contract for the relevant asset and **MUST** present the resulting access token (token
handling as defined in [CX-0018](#cx-0018)). Use of the data is bound by the usage policy in
[Section 3.5](#35-usage-policy), including the `cx.ccm.base:1` usage purpose.

|----------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| `certificateId`                                                      | MANDATORY                 | MANDATORY                                      |
| `revision`                                                           | MANDATORY                 | MANDATORY                                      |
| `certificateType`                                                    | MANDATORY                 | MANDATORY                                      |
| `validFrom`, `validUntil`                                            | MANDATORY                 | MANDATORY                                      |
| `registrationNumber`, `trustLevel`                                   | absent                    | MANDATORY                                      |
| `certifiedLocations`                                                 | absent                    | MANDATORY                                      |
| `certificateTypeVersion`, `areaOfApplication`, `issuer`, `validator` | absent                    | OPTIONAL                                       |

> | `documents`                                                          | absent                    | MANDATORY, each entry carrying `contentBase64` |

Reviewer 4: Listing the the payload here is a bit too much for me again. What is the added benefit to just looking this up in the OpenAPI document?

Author: Agreed, we can chop this and other duplication. Again, should we do this in a second pass?

Reviewer 4: Let me align with @FEILSTE on what is the best course here first

> Usually the notification carries only the lifecycle event, without any document content.
> However, the following explains how a lifecycle event **MAY** also carry the certificate's documents inline.

A Certificate Consumer that wants the full certificate record and document content delivered inline with its lifecycle
events registers its Certificate Consumer API asset under the subject
`cx-taxo:CompanyCertificateManagementConsumerEmbeddedDocumentApi` instead of
`cx-taxo:CompanyCertificateManagementConsumerApi` (see [Section 3.2](#32-certificate-consumer-api)). The two subjects
describe the same endpoints; they differ only in how much of `data.certificate` is populated on `CREATED`/`MODIFIED`
notifications. A Certificate Consumer **MUST** register exactly one of the two Consumer subjects.

When the Certificate Consumer's asset declares the plain `cx-taxo:CompanyCertificateManagementConsumerApi` subject, the
Certificate Provider **MUST** populate `data.certificate` with the triage subset only (`certificateId`,
`revision`, `certificateType`, `validFrom`, `validUntil`) and **MUST NOT** include `registrationNumber`, `trustLevel`,

> `certifiedLocations`, `issuer`, `validator`, or `documents`.

Reviewer 4: This whole section contains a lot of prose that is or should be defined in a standardized via an OpenAPI spec. Half of this information can be referred to the spec itself in my opinion. This also goes for a lot of information in the following paragraphs.

Author: Fine for me to move to the OpenAPI but we have to be careful these can be expressed in a schema constraint. If a requirement cannot be defined in schema, I think we need a MUST statement in the spec so that a test kit can either refer to the schema or a normative statement.

Reviewer 4: Definitely, everything that can not be defined in a schema constraint should be added here as a must statement. However, what attributes exist, which of these are mandatory and so on seems to me best left in the spec.

is forbidden, embedded documents **MUST** include `contentBase64`.)

For a `WITHDRAWN` event (either subject), `data.certificate` carries only `certificateId`. Fulfillment events
(`org.catena-x.ccm.CertificateFulfillmentStatus.v1`) never carry a certificate record.

The above **MUST** also be respected for batch notifications.

The following is a non-normative example of a `CREATED` notification to a Consumer registered under the
`cx-taxo:CompanyCertificateManagementConsumerApi` subject:

```json
{
  "specversion": "1.0",
  "type": "org.catena-x.ccm.CertificateLifecycleStatus.v1",
  "source": "urn:bpn:BPNL0000000001AB",
  "subject": "BPNL0000000002CD",
  "id": "a1b2c3d4-5e6f-7a8b-9c0d-1e2f3a4b5c6d",
  "time": "2025-05-04T07:00:00Z",
  "datacontenttype": "application/json",
  "data": {
    "status": "CREATED",
    "exchangeId": "exch-7f3a9c12-4b8e-4d6a-9e21-0c5b2a1d8f44",
    "certificate": {
      "certificateId": "cert-550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000",
      "revision": 1,
      "certificateType": "iso9001",
      "validFrom": "2023-01-25",
      "validUntil": "2026-01-24"
    }
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 4: Don't we have examples like these in the spec? Personally, I don't see the benefit of these inline examples when the reader can I just see the examples in the spec.

Author: If we have the same examples, agreed, we should just use the Open API spec.

certificate was withdrawn and make it observable — for a withdrawn `certificateId`, `GET /certificates/{id}` **MUST**
return `HTTP 200` with the minimal status body `{ "certificateId": "…", "status": "WITHDRAWN" }` (no metadata or
documents), so a Certificate Consumer that holds the `certificateId` can confirm the withdrawal via the Certificate
Provider API even after the certificate data is no longer served. An unknown `certificateId` still returns `HTTP 404`.

#### 3.3.3 Certificate Acceptance

`POST /certificate-acceptance-notifications`

This API is used by the Certificate Consumer to provide feedback on the status to the Certificate Provider, either
accepting or rejecting the provided certificate. It is based on CloudEvents (see [CloudEvents](#cloudevents)). The event
**MUST** be of **Event Type** `org.catena-x.ccm.CertificateAcceptanceStatus.v1`. The contents of the feedback message
**MUST** be included in the `data` section of the CloudEvent, with `data.status` set to one of the Acceptance-phase
states (`RETRIEVED`, `ACCEPTED`, `REJECTED`, `ERRORED`) according to the lifecycle of the Certificate Exchange as

> defined in [Section 2.1.3](#213-state-machine-certificate-exchange).

Reviewer 3: There is a structural mismatch in the model:

- Certificates are defined as a fixed and complete set of certifiedLocations (Section 2.2.1),
- but Consumers may only receive partial data (Section 3.2.1),
- and can only evaluate data within their own scope and knowledge.

As a result, a Consumer is required to evaluate a complete certificate
based on incomplete visibility and limited domain knowledge.

Therefore, feedback MUST support certifiedLocations-level granularity.

Author: @FEILSTE @nicoprow Can you look at this?

Reviewer 4: Isn't the idea that the consumer evaluates the certificate based on their knowledge only and whether this certificate appears to be in order for their use case? So even if the consumer only received partial location data the consumer only needs to give feedback on whether it certificate satifisies these partial locations. This is at least my understandting. Maybe @FEILSTE can clarify

Reviewer 3: I agree with the general idea that the consumer evaluates the certificate against their use case.

However, the current model only allows feedback at certificate level. This effectively means the certificate is either accepted or rejected as a whole.

In practice, this leads to an implicit full acceptance: even if only a subset of locations is actually relevant or validated, accepting the certificate implies that all included locations are considered compliant.

There is no structured way to express that only parts of the certificate are valid, which makes it difficult to represent partial compliance from a business perspective.

Reviewer 4: But what shoul happen on partial compliance? Wouldn't we need to make a new revision of the certificate then anyway? I'm not familiar with the business requirements for partial rejects as I don't understand what is the expectation what should happen then. Especially in contrast to a full reject

Reviewer 3: Partial compliance is expressed via detailed feedback.

All data is resubmitted as a new revision of the same certificate, with only the affected parts corrected, while already valid locations typically remain accepted and newly clarified locations can be accepted as well.

The acceptance status therefore evolves continuously over time, in contrast to a full reject where all certificate data is considered invalid.

One faulty location should not result in a full rejection, as this would propagate a “red” status across all certificate locations of the certificate.

Author: Shouldn't this be explicitly modeled? For example, in the acceptance message, include a field containing a listed of accepted locations?

Reviewer 3: Yes, I think so. This was covered in the latest standard via the Company Certificate Feedback, `certificateStatus`. It was generally possible to provide feedback at BPN level. With the updated semantic model, we will likely need to adapt that.

> The following is a non-normative example of an `ACCEPTED` acceptance status event:

Reviewer 3: The current acceptance model is strictly tied to the lifecycle of a Certificate Exchange via exchangeId.

However, certificate updates (e.g. MODIFIED lifecycle events) do not open a new exchange
and do not carry an exchangeId (see Sections 2.1 and 3.2.1).

As a result, there is currently no defined way to provide feedback on updated certificate revisions.

Feedback should also be possible for subsequent updates (MODIFIED).

Author: This happens by design through the provider's request API. Otherwise, this can lead to an excessive number of exchanges.

Reviewer 3: I agree this is consistent for Pull via the request API.

However, for Push the behavior is different: MODIFIED updates are proactively delivered (including payload), but they do not open a new exchange and do not carry an exchangeId.

Since feedback is strictly exchange-based, this means there is currently no way to provide feedback on pushed updates.

Author: OK,

I think there are several options then:

1. MODIFIED messages always open an exchange and therefore carry an `exchangeId`. This may create a lot of exchanges that never receive feedback, e.g., when a consumer doesn't care about the certificate. An implementation could "time out" these unanswered exchanges after a period. This makes the modified symmetrical in all cases.

2. MODIFIED messages only create an exchange if the content is included (PUSH). This creates an asymmetry.

3. Keep the existing behavior where MODIFIED does not open an exchange, and in order to do so, the consumer must explicitly do so using the provider API. This is a bit cumbersome for the PUSH scenario, but it avoids creating unnecessary exchanges for certificates the consumer does not care about.

Let's see what people think of these three alternatives.

    {
      "@id": "CCMAPI-provider-usage-policy",
      "permission": [
        {
          "action": "use",
          "constraint": {
            "and": [
              {
                "leftOperand": "FrameworkAgreement",
                "operator": "eq",
                "rightOperand": "DataExchangeGovernance:1.0"
              },
              {
                "leftOperand": "UsagePurpose",
                "operator": "isAnyOf",
                "rightOperand": "cx.ccm.base:1"
              }
            ]
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  ],
  "dcat:distribution": [
    {
      "dct:format": {
        "@id": "HttpData-PULL"
      },
      "dcat:accessService": {
        "@id": "urn:uuid:9f4c2a18-6d7e-4b3a-9c1d-2e5f8a0b3c4d"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

## 4 ASPECT MODELS

### 4.1 ASPECT MODEL "Business Partner Certificate"

> *This section is normative*

The certificate data model is defined normatively by [Section 4.2](#42-terminology) together with the
`CertificateMetadata` schema of the [Certificate Provider API](assets/certificate-provider-api.yaml) OpenAPI
specification. A certificate exchanged under this standard **MUST** conform to that data model.

> A semantically equivalent SAMM aspect model (`io.catenax.business_partner_certificate`) is published separately as a

Reviewer 5: In my opinion - the Aspect model is normative and APIs and schemas are derivved from it.

Author: Thanks for raising this. I think it is worth covering the governance implications of this approach, as it motivated the changes in this PR.

If the aspect model is to serve as a normative artifact for this specification, in my opinion, it would need to be brought directly into the Catena-X standardization process, either by incorporating it here or by anchoring it in a dedicated Catena-X standard. As long as it lives in Tractus-X, it remains subject to revision by project committers independently of the spec review cycle, which could create drift between a published CCM specification and its normative foundation.

There are also sequencing dependencies that would need to be resolved before we could move forward:

- The aspect model would need to be finalized and aligned with the data model described in the specification before the specification itself could be completed.

- The language positioning the OpenAPI definition and specification document as the normative source of truth would need to be removed, since that would no longer hold.

For these reasons, I have retained the OpenAPI specification as the normative reference. The aspect models are a valuable implementation aid for consumers of the standard, and their location in Tractus-X is entirely appropriate for that purpose, but I believe the specification itself should remain the authoritative source of truth.

Reviewer 5: Thanks Jim for your reply. I’m not sure I fully agree with the assessment above. 
Even though the aspect model is maintained in Tractus‑X, it is not arbitrarily changeable. Models there are subject to a defined governance and release process (including modeling stages such as MS1–MS3), which ensures review, quality control, and stability before the release. 
In addition, within our specification, we are referencing a specific version of the model. That means:

- The model with teh specific version is effectively fixed for the scope of the standard, and
- Any subsequent changes in Tractus‑X would not automatically affect the standard unless we explicitly update the reference.

Because of this, I don’t see an inherent risk of uncontrolled drift between the CCM standard and its semantic model. The versioning and release process already provide a sufficient level of stability and traceability, even if the model is hosted in Tractus-X .
That said, I agree that alignment between the API , standard and the aspect model remains important, and we should ensure consistency.

The new version 4.0 of the  aspect model will be released at same time with the standard. The PR is already created https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/sldt-semantic-models/pull/981 and it'S pending review for passing MS3.

<a id="cx-0000"></a>

> [CX-0000:1.0.0 Cloud Events](https://catenax-ev.github.io/docs/standards/CX-0000-CloudEventsFoundation).

Reviewer 2: The usage of the reference in the text above does not relate to the usage of cloud events! So something is wrong here.

Author: I'm not sure I follow, but it could be resolved with the change to reference CX-0018 above.
